Zw contribute paper (#36)
JosiahParry/anime: paper/README.qmd

The flexibility, utility, and performance of ANIME are demonstrated in comparison with previous approaches.
Applications include transport planning, river network analysis, and ecological modeling, which require joins, weighted aggregations, and network subset identification based on shared characteristics.
The proposed algorithm offers a robust solution for reconciling linestrings in spatial datasets, with implications for various domains in spatial data science.

# Keywords {.unnumbered}

Network Conflation, Spatial Data Integration, Geometric Matching, Attribute Transfer, Spatial Interpolation

{{< pagebreak >}}

# Highlights {.unnumbered}

- A novel algorithm for matching topologically dissimilar linear network datasets.
- Implemented in a high-performance, open-source Rust library with R and Python bindings.
- Quantifies correspondence using shared length, supporting m:n relationships instead of binary classification.
- Enables both extensive and intensive attribute interpolation for numeric and categorical data.
- Leverages R*-tree spatial indexing and geometric criteria for efficient and robust matching.

{{< pagebreak >}}

# Introduction

> A central challenge in transportation science is the reconciliation of vector-based linear network datasets from disparate sources, such as those from different government agencies, commercial providers, or time periods. These datasets often represent the same real-world phenomena but possess different underlying topologies and lack common join keys, precluding straightforward integration. The process of joining attributes between such networks: a critical component of the broader task of **conflation**, is further complicated by the fact that the attributes of one feature (e.g., speed limits, traffic volumes) are intended to be associated with its specific geometry, not transferred wholesale to another. Consequently, a weighted approach is necessary to properly associate attributes during integration. As noted by @lei_optimal_2019, "Due to the complexity and limitations of existing methods, planners and analysts often have to employ a heavily manual conflation process, which is time‐consuming and often prohibitively expensive."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A long-standing challenge in the broadly defined field of spatial data science is the reconciliation of vector-based linear network datasets. Such datasets are used in many fields including transport planning, which increasingly requires the integration of multiple representations of linear transport networks from disparate sources, such as those from different government agencies, commercial providers, or time periods. These datasets often represent the same real-world phenomena but possess different underlying topologies and lack common join keys, precluding straightforward integration. The process of joining attributes between such networks: a critical component of the broader task of **conflation**, is further complicated by the fact that the attributes of one feature (e.g., speed limits, traffic volumes) are intended to be associated with its specific geometry, not transferred wholesale to another. Consequently, a weighted approach is necessary to properly associate attributes during integration. As noted by @lei_optimal_2019, "Due to the complexity and limitations of existing methods, planners and analysts often have to employ a heavily manual conflation process, which is time‐consuming and often prohibitively expensive."
```

The proposed algorithm aims to match elements of two sets of LineStrings that are topologically similar and to estimate the amount of shared length between each pair of matched LineStrings. The result of the matching algorithm is a data structure (specifically, a B-Tree map) that contains the matched pairs and their shared lengths, which can be readily converted to a sparse matrix representation.

| Variable/Parameter           | Symbol    | Description                                                                    |
| ---------------------------- | --------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Source features              | $A$       | The input `FeatureCollection` from which features are being matched.           |
| Target features              | $B$       | The input `FeatureCollection` to which features are being matched.             |
| Distance Tolerance           | $DT$      | The maximum distance for a line segment in B to search for matches in A.       |

> | Angle Tolerance              | $AT$      | The maximum angle difference between two line segments to be considered parallel. |

Reviewer 2: These are input parameters

> | Shared Length                | $SL_{ij}$ | The length of overlap between a matched source feature $i$ and target feature $j$. |

Reviewer 2: This is the key output

| Source-weighted proportion | -         | The proportion of a source feature that is matched to a target feature.        |

> | Target-weighted proportion | -         | The proportion of a target feature that is matched to a source feature.        |

Reviewer 2: these are not actually part of the core data structure but are returned for ergonomic reasons so that users of the client library want to do their own thing

Being confident that the $A_{ik}$ and $B_{jk}$ are roughly parallel (within the threshold set by the `angle_threshold` argument), we next need to determine if they are within the distance tolerance determined by $DT$. This is done by measuring the minimum separable distance between $A_{ik}$ and $B_{jk}$. If both conditions are satisfied, then the lines are matched. Following, the shared segment length must be calculated.

### Calculating segment overlap

Once two lines $A_{ik}$ and $B_{jk}$ have been determined to be matches, we need to evaluate how much overlap exists between the two lines. This overlap is defined by the segment length of $A_{ik}$ contained in the overlap in the x or y dimension between $A_{ik}$ or $B_{jk}$. 

Based on the angle of the line $A_{ik}$, $\theta_{A_{ik}}$, we either calculate the overlap in the line segments in either the x or y dimension. 

![](assets/line-seg-overlap-top.png)

### Attribute Integration

> ANIME provides methods for transferring attributes between matched features, supporting both numeric and categorical data types using principles from areal weighted interpolation.

Reviewer 2: at present the categorical interpolation is _only_ available in the R client and isn't implemented in the core-rust algorithm. That would be tricky but definitely possible.
